both in cinema and in video games it's
always a sign of bad writing when the
evil villain is trying to take over the
world or when the hero is trying to save
the world in reality what we tend to
deal with are empires with reasonable
attainable objectives in their own
immediately adjacent part of the world
when we look at the map surrounding Iran
we see that Iran is now facing off
against two major rival empires there's
the Empire of Saudi Arabia there's the
Empire of Turkey and in the middle there
we have Syria and Iraq to countries that
are incredibly weak at the moment but
could be strong in the future and
looking back at the last twenty years
Iran has in general been incredibly
successful in increasing its power in
both Iraq and Syria and I'm highlighting
here the road that connects Iran to the
ocean over around Lebanon where of
course Iran as a client army sitting not
so far from the border of Israel at all
times now that's not the only client
army that Iran has you've probably also
heard about the endless wars between
Saudi Arabia and Iran I can't even
really call them proxy wars but Iran
also has troops fighting on its side
especially in Yemen lately so there's a
real question here there's a sort of
Great Powers standoff between Iran
Turkey and Saudi Arabia up to this point
Saudi Arabia has been the client of the
United States of America Saudi Arabia
has been the ally of the United States
of America I think it's fair to say that
the greatest unknown factor here is to
what extent Russia and China will move
to stabilize this region as American
hegemony declines as the Americans
withdraw
their troops or just generally try to
spend less money reshaping or dominating
this part of the world now if you look
at the front page of China's own YouTube
channel
CGT and there are we have a remarkable
array of propaganda statements letting
us know in absolutely no uncertain terms
that china now intends to form an
alliance with Iran the extent and nature
of what that alliance will be we don't
know but in any case
China will take advantage of the current
nadir of American politics in the region
to try to set up some kind of friendly
and cooperative relations with Iran it
has become well known that Russia is
playing a strategic role in Syria
already but I think it remains to be
seen
to what extent Russia will also
formalize some kind of partnership maybe
with Iran
maybe with Turkey maybe with both Turkey
is expanding its power in Libya it's not
clear if Turkey will contend with the
other two great empires of this region
more or less in the years to come so
with this review of very basic facts
having been accomplished let's just
reflect on what Iran is and what Iran is
now trying to accomplish Iran is not
trying to conquer the world Iran wants
to command and control that highway
linking Lebanon to a fraud they are very
interested in exerting power and
influence and control over Iraq Syria
Lebanon so on and so forth
they are a regional power and they are
an empire of sorts they're also very
interested in advancing they're really
centuries-long struggle against the
hegemony of Saudi Arabia and I think
Saudi Arabia has every reason to be
afraid that if the United States does
scale back or end its military and
economic role in this region Iran may
suddenly or gradually become the most
powerful player on this particular chess
board if you think about this highway
this blue ribbon stretching from east to
west and then think about the enormous
expanse of Russian territory sort of
running parallel to this highway but
further north I mean most of it is off
the map but Russia is Russian territory
is poking down there around the Black
Sea and the Caspian Sea and so on Russia
also has a monumental task ahead of it
in stabilizing the region now stability
is not nearly so glamorous and ideal as
democracy or freedom but Russia doesn't
have a choice Russia can't just pack up
its bags and go home no matter how evil
we may regard this Russian mission to
stabilize the region as being no matter
how we may look down our noses at
Russia's strategic role in Syria
nevertheless Russia has a very clear
mandate to stabilize the region and
stability is something that 20 years of
American imperialism have utterly failed
to deliver very few people have read the
philosophy of Thomas Hobbes I can say as
a matter of fact that my own professors
at the University of Toronto who taught
the philosophy of Thomas Hobbes they
themselves had never read Thomas Hobbes
believe me I'm in a position to know
that Hobbes is a very disturbing
political philosopher for a young man to
read obviously when I first read this
book I was a teenager and I could not
relate to at all the security Rhian
hypothesis of Hobbes the attitude of
Hobbes having seen the vicissitudes of
civil war in England that stability was
worth more than democracy he utterly
laughs at the instability that the study
of ancient Greek and Latin has brought
into England with this ridiculous notion
of democracy now whatever he might have
privately thought about democracy
publicly he saw the terrible reality
that lack of a stable government brought
into people's lives I heard an interview
with a guy in Libya just on the on the
normal news recently and it was very
moving to me because the guy said having
now lived through so many years of
statelessness civil war just bad
government or the absence of government
now if he could travel back in time he
would have fought on the opposite side
from the side he fought on in the Libyan
Civil War the the revolution if you like
the created current conditions in Libya
I was very moving to me because
obviously this is someone he used to be
an idealistic believer in democracy and
who is now like Thomas Hobbes and ashin
demoralized pragmatic believer in
stability stability at any cost
now what if stability means supporting a
theocratic government like Saudi Arabia
what if stability means supporting the
eccentric religious government of Iran
what if stability means a peace treaty
with the worst examples of Muslim
fundamentalist extremism in Afghanistan
is that a price too high for stability
well I have to tell you something I'm
still an idealist
I still think democracy is worth dying
for and it's worth killing for
but people like Vladimir Putin do not
think that people like C Jinping and the
leader of China do not think that C
Jinping and Vladimir Putin are quite
willing to compromise and come to
cooperative political Arrangements with
all of the religious fundamentalist
dictators in this part of the world any
of them or all of them for the sake of
getting on with business as usual they
have no interest in killing and dying
for the progress of human rights
secularism atheism science let alone
democracy it's worthwhile to mention
also that Iran has some democracy if you
were going to rate democracy on a scale
from one to ten
you know how to know if Iran gets a four
but Iran is more of a real democracy
than China they do have newspapers that
criticize the government they do have
elections and so on and so forth
Iran is very far from an ideal democracy
nobody would compare Iran to Switzerland
however nevertheless Iran has a somewhat
democratic political system whereas
China is an authoritarian oligarchy
under the one-party control of the
Communist Party and Saudi Arabia is also
a monarchy a theocratic monarchy if you
like but Saudi Arabia would be on a
scale of one to ten Saudi Arabia gets a
zero for democracy maybe China gets a
one out of ten for democracy and Iran
actually is somewhat more democratic
than these other countries and the
United States of America has the
ultimate luxury of just going home I
don't know if one day before I die it
will be revealed who wrote the secret
letter revealing that what they would
withdraw from Iraq it would certainly be
nice to know this is a voice of dissent
within the Trump White House but what
this letter says is what I'm sure many
military experts in the United States
are thinking there was a vote in the
Iraqi parliament the Parliament of Iraq
voted to request that America just leave
that America withdraw its troops America
just go home and the United States of
America has the luxury right now of just
accepting that offer accepting that
opportunity and saying ok we'll leave
because when you look at this map of the
world again I've just described to you
Turkey has its objectives Saudi Arabia's
as the judges Iran as its objectives
Russia also has some modest long-term
objectives here ok
what difference does it make to the
United States of America if Turkey
increases in power if Iran increases in
power of Saudi Arabia increases or
decreases in power
America has everything to lose and
absolutely nothing to win as the tides
of empire go back and forth across this
region it doesn't really matter if you
regard Russia's motives as cynical or
pious it doesn't matter if you regard
China's motives as cynical or pious both
in terms of popular democracy and in
terms of elite level decision making the
Americans have to look in the mirror and
ask what is it we're trying to
accomplish here what is it we're trying
to win
is it American national policy to
promote a Sunni Islam against Shiite
Islam and if so why is it American
policy to promote the power of the House
of Saud the the ruling royal family of
Saudi Arabia as somehow being better
than you know the elected leaders of
Iran and the just barely elected leaders
of Turkey turkey is an incredibly
corrupt democracy but on paper is just
barely a democracy rather the favored
ship and so on what what is the agenda
here in reality if America remains in
the region they will gradually at the
cost of billions of dollars per year
simply end up adopting the same cynical
posture that Russia already hands of
just trying to stabilize the region
enough to be shall we say good for
business human rights and democracy
sadly are not the business that any of
these empires are in not the Iranian
Empire not the Turkish Empire not the
Saudi Empire
[Music]